.. currentmodule:: larch

==============================================
111: Swissmetro Cross-Nested Logit Mode Choice
==============================================

.. testsetup:: *

   import larch



This example is a mode choice model built using the Swissmetro example dataset.
First we create the DB and Model objects.  When we create the DB object, we will
redefine the weight value:

.. testcode::

	d = larch.DB.Example('SWISSMETRO')
	m = larch.Model(d)

We can attach a title to the model. The title does not affect the calculations
as all; it is merely used in various output report styles.

.. testcode::

	m.title = "swissmetro example 11 (cross nested logit)"


The swissmetro dataset, as with all Biogeme data, is only in `co` format.

.. testcode::

	m.utility.co("1",1,"ASC_TRAIN")
	m.utility.co("1",3,"ASC_CAR")
	m.utility.co("TRAIN_TT",1,"B_TIME")
	m.utility.co("SM_TT",2,"B_TIME")
	m.utility.co("CAR_TT",3,"B_TIME")
	m.utility.co("TRAIN_CO*(GA==0)",1,"B_COST")
	m.utility.co("SM_CO*(GA==0)",2,"B_COST")
	m.utility.co("CAR_CO",3,"B_COST")


To create a new nest, we can use the new_nest command, although we'll need to know what the
alternative codes are for the alternatives in our dataset. To find out, we can do:

.. doctest::
	:options: +ELLIPSIS, +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE

	>>> m.db.alternatives()
	[(1, 'Train'), (2, 'SM'), (3, 'Car')]


For this example, we want to nest together the Train and Car modes into a "existing" modes nest,
and we want to nest Train and SM together into a "public" modes nest. This creates a structure
different from a traditional nested logit model, because the Train mode
is "cross-nested": it appears in more than one nest.  The desired nesting structure then looks
like this:

.. digraph:: Desired_Nesting_Structure

	bgcolor="transparent"
	root [label="Root", shape="oval"]
	train [label="Train", shape=box, style="rounded", penwidth=2]
	sm [label="SM", shape=box, style="rounded", penwidth=2]
	car [label="Car", shape=box, style="rounded", penwidth=2]
	public [label="Public", shape=oval]
	exist [label="Existing", shape=oval]
	exist -> train
	public -> train
	public -> sm
	exist -> car
	root -> exist
	root -> public



To do this we can use the new_nest command like this:

.. testcode::

	existing_id = m.new_nest("existing", parent=m.root_id, children=[1,3])
	public_id = m.new_nest("public", parent=m.root_id, children=[1,2])

The :meth:`new_nest` method returns an identifying code number for the newly
created nest.  We'll use that code number below.

For a cross-nested model, we need to assign an allocation level to each graph link
for all entering links of any node that has more than one predecessor.  In this case,
that applies only to the "Train" node.

Larch employs a logit-type function to manage this allocation, instead of specifying
the allocation directly as a parameter.  So, the allocation on the link Public->Train (PT)
is given by

.. math::
	\alpha_{PT} = \frac{\exp ( \phi_{PT} Z )}{\exp ( \phi_{PT} Z ) + \exp ( \phi_{ET} Z )},

where :math:`\phi_{PT}` is a vector of zero or more parameters associated with the
link PT, :math:`\phi_{ET}` is a similar vector of parameters for the link Public->Existing (ET)
and :math:`Z` is a vector of :ref:`idco` variables.

If we give our model no other commands, the length of these parameter and data vectors will be zero,
and the allocation parameters for links PT and ET will default to 0.5 each.  But, we can
relax this constrained default value by putting some defined parameters into the
formula:

.. testcode::

	m.link[existing_id, 1](param="phi_et", data="1")

Note that, as for alternative specific constants in the utility function, we leave out
one of the possibilities (here, we skip ET) to avoid overspecifying the model.

Constructing the allocation parameters like this has a few benefits. It automatically
ensures that the total allocation for each node to it's incoming links is always 1.  It
also allows the parameter phi_pt to be estimated as unconstrained, as it can take on any value
without bound and still produce a properly normalized model.  Lastly, it allows the allocation
to be a function of the :ref:`idco` data, and not merely a fixed value.  One drawback is
that there is no statistical test to use on the value of the estimated phi parameters to determine
if the true value of the alloction should be 1 or 0, because those allocations are
associated with infinite values for phi.

We can estimate the models and check the results match up with those given by Biogeme:

.. doctest::
	:options: +ELLIPSIS, +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE

	>>> result = m.maximize_loglike()
	>>> print(result.message)
	Optimization terminated successfully...
	
	>>> print(m.report('txt', sigfigs=4))
	=========================================================================================...
	swissmetro example 11 (cross nested logit)
	=========================================================================================...
	Model Parameter Estimates
	-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------...
	Parameter	InitValue   	FinalValue  	StdError    	t-Stat      	NullValue
	ASC_TRAIN	 0.0        	 0.09828    	 0.05634    	 1.744      	 0.0        
	ASC_CAR  	 0.0        	-0.2404     	 0.03844    	-6.255      	 0.0        
	B_TIME   	 0.0        	-0.007769   	 0.0005576  	-13.93      	 0.0        
	B_COST   	 0.0        	-0.008189   	 0.000446   	-18.36      	 0.0        
	existing 	 1.0        	 0.3976     	 0.02761    	-21.82      	 1.0        
	public   	 1.0        	 0.2431     	 0.03361    	-22.52      	 1.0        
	phi_et   	 0.0        	-0.01971    	 0.1157     	-0.1703     	 0.0
	=========================================================================================...
	Model Estimation Statistics
	-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------...
	Log Likelihood at Convergence     	-5214.05
	Log Likelihood at Null Parameters 	-6964.66
	-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------...
	Rho Squared w.r.t. Null Parameters	0.251
	=========================================================================================...


.. tip::

	If you want access to the model in this example without worrying about assembling all the code blocks
	together on your own, you can load a read-to-estimate copy like this::

		m = larch.Model.Example(111)


