.. currentmodule:: larch

=================================
17: MTC Expanded MNL Mode Choice
=================================

.. testsetup:: *

	import larch
	import larch.examples
	import pandas
	pandas.set_option("display.max_columns", 999)
	pandas.set_option('expand_frame_repr', False)
	pandas.set_option('precision', 3)
	larch._doctest_mode_ = True

For this example, we're going to re-create model 17 from the
`Self Instructing Manual <http://www.caee.utexas.edu/prof/Bhat/COURSES/LM_Draft_060131Final-060630.pdf>`_. (pp. 128)

.. testcode::

	d = larch.examples.MTC()
	m = larch.Model(dataservice=d)

We will use the usual choice and availability variables.

.. testcode::

	m.availability_var = '_avail_'
	m.choice_ca_var = '_choice_'

.. testcode::

	from larch.roles import P, X

	m.utility_ca = (
		+ X("totcost/hhinc") * P("costbyincome")
		+ X("tottime * (altnum <= 4)") * P("motorized_time")
		+ X("tottime * (altnum >= 5)") * P("nonmotorized_time")
		+ X("ovtt/dist * (altnum <= 4)") * P("motorized_ovtbydist")
	)

The "totcost/hhinc" data is computed once as a new variable when loading the model data.
The same applies for tottime filtered by motorized modes (we harness the convenient fact
that all the motorized modes have identifying numbers 4 or less), and "ovtt/dist".

.. testcode::

	for a in [4,5,6]:
		m.utility_co[a] += X("hhinc") * P("hhinc#{}".format(a))

Since the model we want to create groups together DA, SR2 and SR3+ jointly as
reference alternatives with respect to income, we can simply omit all of these alternatives
from the block that applies to **hhinc**.

For vehicles per worker, the preferred model include a joint parameter on SR2 and SR3+,
but not including DA and not fixed at zero.  Here we might use a shadow_parameter (also
called an alias in some places), which allows
us to specify one or more parameters that are simply a fixed proportion of another parameter.
For example, we can say that vehbywrk_SR2 will be equal to vehbywrk_SR.


.. testcode::

	for a,name in m.dataservice.alternative_pairs[1:3]:
		m.utility_co[a] += (
			+ X("vehbywrk") * P("vehbywrk_SR")
			+ X("wkccbd+wknccbd") * P("wkcbd_"+name)
			+ X("wkempden") * P("wkempden_"+name)
			+ P("ASC_"+name)
		)

	for a,name in m.dataservice.alternative_pairs[3:]:
		m.utility_co[a] += (
			+ X("vehbywrk") * P("vehbywrk_"+name)
			+ X("wkccbd+wknccbd") * P("wkcbd_"+name)
			+ X("wkempden") * P("wkempden_"+name)
			+ P("ASC_"+name)
		)


We didn't explicitly define our parameters first, which is fine; Larch will
find them in the utility functions (or elsewhere in more complex models).
But they may be found in a weird order that is hard to read in reports.
We can define an ordering scheme by assigning to the parameter_groups attribute,
like this:

.. testcode::

	m.ordering = (
		('LOS', ".*cost.*", ".*time.*", ".*dist.*",),
		('Zonal', "wkcbd.*", "wkempden.*",),
		('Household', "hhinc.*", "vehbywrk.*",),
		('ASCs', "ASC.*",),
	)

Each item in parameter_ordering is a tuple, with a label and one or more regular expressions,
which will be compared against
all the parameter names.  Any names that match will be pulled out and put into the
reporting order sequentially.  Thus if a parameter name would match more than one
regex, it will appear in the ordering only for the first match.


Having created this model, we can then estimate it:

.. doctest::
	:options: +ELLIPSIS, +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE, +REPORT_NDIFF

	>>> m.load_data()
	>>> m.maximize_loglike()
	┣ ...Optimization terminated successfully...
	>>> m.calculate_parameter_covariance()
	>>> m.loglike()
	-3444.1...
	>>> print(m.pfo()[['value','std_err','t_stat','robust_std_err','robust_t_stat']])
	                               value    std_err  t_stat  robust_std_err  robust_t_stat
	Category  Parameter
	LOS       costbyincome        -0.052  1.040e-02  -5.036       1.334e-02         -3.927
	          motorized_time      -0.020  3.815e-03  -5.292       3.898e-03         -5.178
	          nonmotorized_time   -0.045  5.768e-03  -7.878       5.760e-03         -7.890
	          motorized_ovtbydist -0.133  1.964e-02  -6.763       2.410e-02         -5.513
	Zonal     wkcbd_BIKE           0.489  3.611e-01   1.355       3.665e-01          1.335
	          wkcbd_SR2            0.260  1.234e-01   2.107       1.234e-01          2.106
	          wkcbd_SR3            1.069  1.913e-01   5.590       1.899e-01          5.630
	          wkcbd_TRANSIT        1.309  1.657e-01   7.899       1.585e-01          8.259
	          wkcbd_WALK           0.102  2.521e-01   0.404       2.588e-01          0.393
	          wkempden_BIKE        0.002  1.215e-03   1.586       1.176e-03          1.640
	          wkempden_SR2         0.002  3.903e-04   4.042       4.128e-04          3.822
	          wkempden_SR3         0.002  4.520e-04   4.994       4.537e-04          4.975
	          wkempden_TRANSIT     0.003  3.607e-04   8.684       3.831e-04          8.178
	          wkempden_WALK        0.003  7.421e-04   3.895       7.107e-04          4.067
	Household hhinc#4             -0.005  1.977e-03  -2.692       2.047e-03         -2.600
	          hhinc#5             -0.009  5.154e-03  -1.677       5.967e-03         -1.449
	          hhinc#6             -0.006  3.149e-03  -1.905       3.431e-03         -1.748
	          vehbywrk_BIKE       -0.702  2.583e-01  -2.718       3.094e-01         -2.270
	          vehbywrk_SR         -0.317  6.663e-02  -4.752       7.560e-02         -4.188
	          vehbywrk_TRANSIT    -0.946  1.183e-01  -7.999       1.370e-01         -6.907
	          vehbywrk_WALK       -0.722  1.694e-01  -4.261       2.032e-01         -3.552
	ASCs      ASC_BIKE            -1.629  4.274e-01  -3.811       4.861e-01         -3.351
	          ASC_SR2             -1.808  1.061e-01 -17.035       1.170e-01        -15.451
	          ASC_SR3             -3.434  1.519e-01 -22.610       1.557e-01        -22.048
	          ASC_TRANSIT         -0.685  2.478e-01  -2.764       2.690e-01         -2.547
	          ASC_WALK             0.068  3.480e-01   0.196       3.493e-01          0.195


.. tip::

	If you want access to the model in this example without worrying about assembling all the code blocks
	together on your own, you can load a read-to-estimate copy like this::

		m = larch.example(17)
