.. currentmodule:: larch

==============================================
111: Swissmetro Cross-Nested Logit Mode Choice
==============================================

.. testsetup:: *

	import larch
	import os
	import pandas
	pandas.set_option("display.max_columns", 999)
	pandas.set_option('expand_frame_repr', False)
	pandas.set_option('precision', 3)
	larch._doctest_mode_ = True

This example is a mode choice model built using the Swissmetro example dataset.
First we create the DB and Model objects.  When we create the DB object, we will
redefine the weight value:

.. testcode::

	d = larch.examples.SWISSMETRO()
	m = larch.Model(dataservice=d)

We can attach a title to the model. The title does not affect the calculations
as all; it is merely used in various output report styles.

.. testcode::

	m.title = "swissmetro example 11 (cross nested logit)"

We need to identify the availability and choice variables. These have been conveniently
set up in the data.

.. testcode::

	m.availability_var = 'avail'
	m.choice_ca_var = 'choice'

The swissmetro dataset, as with all Biogeme data, is only in `co` format.

.. testcode::

	from larch.roles import P,X
	m.utility_co[1] = ( P.ASC_TRAIN
	                  + P.B_TIME * X.TRAIN_TT
	                  + P.B_COST * X("TRAIN_CO*(GA==0)") )
	m.utility_co[2] = ( P.B_TIME * X.SM_TT
	                  + P.B_COST * X("SM_CO*(GA==0)") )
	m.utility_co[3] = ( P.ASC_CAR
	                  + P.B_TIME * X.CAR_TT
	                  + P.B_COST * X("CAR_CO") )


For this example, we want to nest together the Train and Car modes into a "existing" modes nest,
and we want to nest Train and SM together into a "public" modes nest. This creates a structure
different from a traditional nested logit model, because the Train mode
is "cross-nested": it appears in more than one nest.  The desired nesting structure then looks
like this:

.. digraph:: Desired_Nesting_Structure

	bgcolor="transparent"
	root [label="Root", shape="oval"]
	train [label="Train", shape=box, style="rounded", penwidth=2]
	sm [label="SM", shape=box, style="rounded", penwidth=2]
	car [label="Car", shape=box, style="rounded", penwidth=2]
	public [label="Public", shape=oval]
	exist [label="Existing", shape=oval]
	exist -> train
	public -> train
	public -> sm
	exist -> car
	root -> exist
	root -> public


To create nests, we can use the new_node command, although we'll need to know what the
alternative codes are for the alternatives in our dataset. To find out, we can do:

.. doctest::
	:options: +ELLIPSIS, +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE, +REPORT_NDIFF

	>>> dict(m.dataservice.alternatives)
	{1: 'Train', 2: 'SM', 3: 'Car'}


For this example, we want to nest together the Train and Car modes into a "existing" modes nest,
and we want to nest together the Train and SM modes into a "public" modes nest.
We can use the new_nest command like this:

.. testcode::

	m.graph.new_node(
		parameter="existing",
		parent=m.graph.root_id,
		children=[1,3],
		name='Existing',
		phi_parameters={1:'PHI'},
	)
	m.graph.new_node(
		parameter="public",
		parent=m.graph.root_id,
		children=[1,2],
		name='Public',
	)


For a cross-nested model, we need to assign an allocation level to each graph link
for all entering links of any node that has more than one predecessor.  In this case,
that applies only to the "Train" node.

Larch employs a logit-type function to manage this allocation, instead of specifying
the allocation directly as a parameter.  So, the allocation on the link Public->Train (PT)
is given by

.. math::
	\alpha_{PT} = \frac{\exp ( \phi_{PT} )}{\exp ( \phi_{PT} ) + \exp ( \phi_{ET} )},

where :math:`\phi_{PT}` is a parameter associated with the
link PT, :math:`\phi_{ET}` is a similar parameter for the link Public->Existing (ET).

We can attach parameters to each link using the `phi_parameters` argument to new_node.

Larch will find all the parameters in the model, but we'd like to output them in
a rational order.  We can use the ordering method to do this:

.. testcode::

	m.ordering = [
		("ASCs", 'ASC.*',),
		("LOS", 'B_.*',),
		("LogSums", 'Existing', 'Public', ),
	]

The swissmetro example models exclude some observations.  We will use the selector
to identify the observations we would like to keep.  There are two selector criteria,
and only cases that evaluate `True` for both are selected.

.. testcode::

	m.dataservice.selector = ["PURPOSE in (1,3)", "CHOICE != 0"]

We can estimate the models and check the results match up with those given by Biogeme:

.. doctest::
	:options: +ELLIPSIS, +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE, +REPORT_NDIFF

	>>> m.load_data()
	>>> m.maximize_loglike(method='slsqp')
	┣ ...Optimization terminated successfully...
	>>> m.loglike()
	-5214.063...
	>>> m.calculate_parameter_covariance()

.. doctest::
	:options: +ELLIPSIS, +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE, +REPORT_NDIFF +SKIP

	>>> print(m.pfo()[['value','std_err','t_stat','robust_std_err','robust_t_stat']])  # parameter frame, ordered
	                    value    std_err  t_stat  robust_std_err  robust_t_stat
	Category Parameter
	ASCs     ASC_CAR   -0.238  3.606e-02  -6.606       4.883e-02         -4.878
	         ASC_TRAIN  0.092  4.513e-02   2.047       6.503e-02          1.421
	LOS      B_COST    -0.008  4.247e-04 -19.335       5.493e-04        -14.949
	         B_TIME    -0.008  5.376e-04 -14.497       9.715e-04         -8.022
	Other    existing   0.399  2.711e-02 -22.186       3.937e-02        -15.277
	         public     0.246  3.035e-02 -24.853       2.068e-02        -36.463

.. tip::

	If you want access to the model in this example without worrying about assembling all the code blocks
	together on your own, you can load a read-to-estimate copy like this::

		m = larch.example(111)
